add 0001-organization (#2)
logto-io/rfcs: draft/0001-organization.md

1. The access token MUST be a JWT token.
2. The access token MUST have a valid signature according to the algorithm defined in the `alg` header parameter and the JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) of the OpenID Provider (OP).
3. The `iss` claim MUST exactly match the issuer identifier of the OP.
4. The `org` claim MUST exactly match one of the valid organization identifiers in the resource server.
5. The `exp` claim MUST be greater than or equal to the current Unix time. The resource server MAY add a reasonable leeway to this time.
6. The `iat` claim MUST be less than or equal to the current Unix time.
7. The `scope` claim MUST be a subset of the permissions in the organization template.

## 7. Drawbacks

### 7.1. ID token size

The introduction of new claims may increase the size of the ID token. In a multi-tenant environment, the ID token size may significantly increase if the user has numerous memberships and roles.

To mitigate this issue, the OP MAY choose to include organization claims in the ID token only when the client requests the [Userinfo Endpoint](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#UserInfo) with the `organization` scope.

> ### 7.2. Allowed dynamic scopes

Author: here are some alternatives on handling scopes:

- passing all organization scopes in the initial auth request (i.e. shared with OAuth/OpenID)
  - add some reserved prefix, e.g. `organization:`. thus `organization:read:books` means `read:books` in a org
- use another parameter for orgnaization scopes

~~note the alternatives above can be compatible with the glob match, e.g. `*` or `organization:*`.~~

Author: ~~this is out-dated. need to specify scopes in the auth request for security~~

updated

It is RECOMMENDED to only use lowercase letters with specific symbols (`:_`) for permissions.

### 4.4. Organization role

An organization role has a unique identifier and contains a set of organization permissions. Each organization role in the template SHOULD only be granted with predefined permissions in the same template. An organization role MAY have no permission granted.

### 4.5. Assign roles to organization members

Before assigning roles to an identity, the identity MUST have a membership with the organization, making them an organization member. An organization member can be assigned multiple roles within the organization, and each role held by the member must be predefined in the organization template. The complete set of permissions granted to an organization member is the union of all permissions granted by their roles.

### 4.6. Role-based access control

To authorize an actor (identity) to perform a specific action within an organization context, the actor MUST be assigned at least one role that contains the desired permission (scope).

If the actor does not specify the organization context, the authorization MUST fail.

> It's important to note that organization roles are not considered in authorization. The actor is authorized to perform the action based solely on the organization permission, regardless of their organization role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that organization roles are not considered in authorization. The actor is authorized to perform the action based solely on the organization permissions, regardless of their organization roles.
```

Author: i think here for a specific action, it's mapped to one permission (instead of "permissions"). good with "roles"

Author: thinking "permission" would be more appropriate since it's for a specific tenant. i'm good with "permissions"

## 5. Authentication

In OpenID Connect, the [ID Token](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken) is a JWT token containing user identity information. In addition to the [Standard Claims](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#StandardClaims), we introduce new claims to the ID token to support organization.

### 5.1 Organization claims

| Name               | Type                  | Description                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ------------------ | --------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | organization_ids   | array of strings      | The unique organization identifiers that the user has a membership with.                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 2: Can we use `org_ids` to reduce the JWT length, the same as other claims like "iss" and "exp".

Author: i don't like three-letter abbreviations, but i'm good with it. we can vote for this

Author: ```js
{ organizations: [{ id: '12345', roles: [] }] }
```

> | organization_roles | array of JSON objects | An array of organization roles that the user has. Each object contains the following fields: <ul><li>`organization_id`: The unique organization identifier as a string.</li><li>`roles`: The role names granted to the user within the organization.</li></ul> |

Reviewer: To simplify the data structure. It is acceptable to make the `orginazation_roles` as an array of strings as well. 
orginationRoleName could have a standard format sth like `${orginzationId}:${roleName}`?

And also maybe a single claim field called `organizations`:

```
{
 id: string;
 roles: Role[]
}
```

Author: yeah i thought about it, but it's not developer-friendly and it needs extra parsing in the client side. i know it's ok, i just don't understand the drawback of following the standard json format (i mean for `scope` in OAuth), since it brings more troubles than the benefit (size reduction), and the size of tokens should not be a consideration in most reasonable cases nowadays.

Author: the issue with a single `organizations` field: a user may have no role in some orgs, makes the `roles` claim useless

Author: use
```
{ id: string; roles: Role[] }
```

The objects in the `organization_roles` array must adhere to these rules:

- The `organization_id` field must be unique within the array.
- The `roles` field must be an array of strings, with each string being unique within the array.
- The `roles` field must not be empty.

These rules help minimize the size of the ID token and can be enforced by the OpenID Provider (OP) when issuing the ID token.

An example of the ID token with organization claims:

```json
{
  "sub": "12345",
  "name": "John Wick",
  "organization_ids": ["12345", "67890", "13579"],
  "organization_roles": [
    {
      "organization_id": "12345",
      "roles": ["admin"]
    },
    {
      "organization_id": "67890",
      "roles": ["viewer", "editor"]
    }
  ]
}
```

### 5.2 Requesting claims using scope values

As per the existing authentication flow, the OpenID Provider (OP) SHOULD accept an additional `scope` value in the authentication request and provide the corresponding claim in the ID token:

> - `organization`: This scope value requests access to the `organization_ids` and `organization_roles` claims.

Reviewer: Since this is not a common standard, better give it a prefix?  It will become a reserved scope term by Logto.

Reviewer 2: Want to confirm that, this is a special, or preserved scope for Logto Orginization?

Author: there's no recommendation for claim naming in [ID token](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken), or [addtional claims](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AdditionalClaims), specifically.

this reminds me the argument of appending `X-` in custom headers. i think it's ok to add them directly

Reviewer: Claim naming is fine, how about the `organization` scope here?

Author: i'm good with a scoped scope name though

Author: updated

We utilize the same Token Endpoint defined in OAuth 2.0 and introduce a new grant type for requesting JWT access tokens in the context of an organization.

Implementing JWT enforcement can enable offline authorization for the resource server, reducing network latency and improving performance.

### 6.1. Token request

OAuth 2.0 defines the [Token Endpoint](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749.html#section-3.2) for requesting access tokens. Although it's possible to add more parameters to the existing grants (as [RFC 8707](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8707.html#name-access-token-request) does), it's clearer to define a new grant type specifically for requesting access tokens within an organization context.

> The primary challenge of adding more parameters for this specification is the need to alter the inner OP implementation. Since we are creating an extension based on traditional specifications, there's no guarantee that upstream will accept our changes. Therefore, we opt to define a new grant type.

#### 6.1.1 Token parameters

To request an access token within an organization context, the client MUST send a request to the Token Endpoint with the following parameters:

> - `grant_type` (REQUIRED): The grant type. The value MUST be `urn:logto:grant-type:organization_token`.

Reviewer: By that mean any third-party build-in OAuth modules or SDKs can not seamlessly integrate the organization feature in Logto?  Could cause extra effort for developers to understand or integrate with Logto. 

A couple of related questions:

Does this mean that the newly defined `urn:logto:grant-type:organization_token` grant type can only be used to request an organization-specific `access_token`? It cannot be mixed with OAuth `access_tokens`. Neither `resource` nor `resource scopes` are acceptable.

The new grant type shares the same `refresh_token` as the `refresh token grant type`. Also, the same rotate strategies. 

This might be the major challenging new concept in this design. Could have a further discussion and alignment. cc: @logto-io/eng

Author: true and not true. custom grants are supported in OAuth, and i belive modern SDKs can handle this easily. in addtion, we reuse the refresh token granted from the auth flow, so the effot won't be huge.

Author: > Does this mean that the newly defined urn:logto:grant-type:organization_token grant type can only be used to request an organization-specific access_token? It cannot be mixed with OAuth access_tokens. Neither resource nor resource scopes are acceptable.

yes, like it defines. what not in the spec won't be accepted

Author: > The new grant type shares the same refresh_token as the refresh token grant type. Also, the same rotate strategies.
>
> This might be the major challenging new concept in this design. Could have a further discussion and alignment.

wondering why. i thought this would be simpler since the refresh token was initially granted via `/auth` (not `/token`), which does not relate to grant types

Reviewer: > This might be the major challenging new concept in this design. Could have a further discussion and alignment.

Sorry for the confusion. The "new concept" refers to the new `Grant Type` here.

Author: discussed offline. keep as it is

- `refresh_token` (REQUIRED): The refresh token issued to the client. This refresh token follows the same definition as in [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [RFC OAuth 2.0](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749.html#section-1.5), and it must have the `organization` scope.
- `organization_id` (REQUIRED): The unique identifier of the organization.
- `scope` (REQUIRED): The scopes that the client is requesting. The value MUST be a space-delimited list of strings. If a scope has not been granted to the user or it is not a valid scope in the organization template, the authorization server SHOULD ignore it.
  - If the `scope` parameter is not provided, the authorization server MUST return an error response with the `invalid_request` error code.

> **Note**

> > The scope values in the token request MAY not presented in the authorization request. Refer to [Section 7.2](#72-allowed-dynamic-scopes) for more details.

Author: this is out-dated. need to specify scopes in the auth request for security

An organization template is not associated with any specific organization; it is a resource at the tenant level that comprises organization permissions and roles.

> This specification focuses on a single organization template scenario. Multiple organization templates within a tenant are beyond the scope of this discussion.

### 4.3. Organization permission

An organization permission SHOULD be represented as a meaningful string, also serving as the name and unique identifier within the organization template. Permission names should be easily understandable. For example, `read:books` indicates the action to read or retrieve books in the system, while `update:books` signifies updating book information.

It is RECOMMENDED to only use lowercase letters with specific symbols (`:_`) for permissions.

### 4.4. Organization role

An organization role has a unique identifier and contains a set of organization permissions. Each organization role in the template SHOULD only be granted with predefined permissions in the same template. An organization role MAY have no permission granted.

### 4.5. Assign roles to organization members

> Before assigning roles to an identity, the identity MUST have a membership with the organization, making them an organization member. An organization member can be assigned multiple roles within the organization, and each role held by the member must be predefined in the organization template. The complete set of permissions granted to an organization member is the union of all permissions granted by their roles.

Reviewer 3: Can we directly assign an org role to an identity and hence the identity obtain the membership of the org? If not, what's the reason?

Author: no, it's a business need

| organization_roles | array of JSON objects | An array of organization roles that the user has. Each object contains the following fields: <ul><li>`organization_id`: The unique organization identifier as a string.</li><li>`roles`: The role names granted to the user within the organization.</li></ul> |

The objects in the `organization_roles` array must adhere to these rules:

- The `organization_id` field must be unique within the array.
- The `roles` field must be an array of strings, with each string being unique within the array.
- The `roles` field must not be empty.

These rules help minimize the size of the ID token and can be enforced by the OpenID Provider (OP) when issuing the ID token.

An example of the ID token with organization claims:

```json
{
  "sub": "12345",
  "name": "John Wick",
  "organization_ids": ["12345", "67890", "13579"],
  "organization_roles": [
    {
      "organization_id": "12345",
      "roles": ["admin"]
    },
    {
      "organization_id": "67890",
      "roles": ["viewer", "editor"]

>     }

Reviewer 3: I was wondering how an org ID without specific org roles works. If the organization has some built-in permissions that do not need to manually assigned to actors, it should be good enough, but I'm not sure whether we need to mention this case.

Author: business needs

- `grant_type` (REQUIRED): The grant type. The value MUST be `urn:logto:grant-type:organization_token`.
- `refresh_token` (REQUIRED): The refresh token issued to the client. This refresh token follows the same definition as in [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [RFC OAuth 2.0](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749.html#section-1.5), and it must have the `organization` scope.
- `organization_id` (REQUIRED): The unique identifier of the organization. It MUST be an organization that the user has a membership with.
- `scope` (REQUIRED): The scopes that the client is requesting. The value MUST be a space-delimited list of strings. If a scope has not been granted to the user or it is not a valid scope in the organization template, the authorization server SHOULD ignore it.
  - The scope values MUST be a subset of the scopes granted to the user during authentication, and the authorization server MUST NOT grant any additional scopes.
  - If the `scope` parameter is not provided, the authorization server MUST return an error response with the `invalid_request` error code.

#### 6.1.2 Successful token response

> If the request is valid, and the authorization server successfully issues an access token, the response body SHOULD meet the requirements outlined in [Section 12.2](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokenResponse) of OpenID Connect.

Reviewer 4: a new refresh token will be returned?

Author: discussed offline, not an issue

### 7.3. The absence of resource indicators

[Resource Indicators](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8707.html) define a standardized way to request access tokens for specific resources, which is particularly useful for multiple API endpoints with varying permissions. However, applying this concept to organizations remains unclear and requires further discussion.

## 8. Rationale and alternatives

The concept of organizations is prevalent in modern SaaS applications, known by various names like workspaces, projects, and more, as seen in Slack, GitHub, and Google Workspace. Many of our users have expressed the need for this feature, making it a crucial addition to Logto.

During discussions, two key aspects emerged:

**Implementation**

Logto Cloud already follows a typical multi-tenant model for identity, and we initially used Resource Indicators to support it. However, we encountered two challenges:

- Duplicating permissions and roles for each tenant (organization) proved to be unscalable and difficult to maintain.

> - There was no direct connection between an identity and the resources the identity has access to, requiring users to perform at least two authentication requests to obtain an access token for a specific tenant.

Reviewer 3: nit: should we specify 'two authentication requests'?

Author: updated
